Analysis of an Argument
Read: “ Agonism in the Academy: Surviving the Argument Culture,” by Deborah Tannen
An analysis breaks argument down into components to understand how they relate to one another to provide meaning.
Begin: Identify what the author is doing, how article is constructed, what the author’s purpose is and how the author connects to audience (rhetorical précis).
Define: “agonism” – the dictionary (denotation) and in context to Tannen’s article. What connotations may be in play? How does this position the argument Tannen makes?
Consider these terms and identify them within the text: claim (the arguable assertion); reasons/support (evidence and information given to support claim); problem/solution; common ground; appeals – ethos, pathos, logos; rhetorical strategies – narration, description, cause/effect, rhetorical questioning, compare/contrast, definition, listing, etc.
Your writing task:
In a three to five page essay (MLA format) analyze Tannen’s argument. In your paper, make clear the development of her argument, how she appeals to the audience and uses strategies to gain a certain result, aka, persuade her readers (consider is this a pragmatic or conceptual call for change … or both).
Successful papers will:
• Describe for a reader unfamiliar with this text Tannen's argument, showing how she asserts that the “battle metaphor” promotes an “atmosphere of animosity” and what her central claim is;
•Show both what is the "problem" (rhetorical situation) and how she thinks academia can address this;
Explain how Tanner appeals to the readers in order to persuade them;
•Explore the effectiveness of the argument and overall purpose;
•Use an effective structure that carefully guides the reader from one idea to the next;
•Be thoroughly edited so that sentences are readable and appropriate for an academic audience.

http://www9.georgetown.edu/faculty/tannend/chronicle033100.htm

Assessment criterion:
Grammar
Citations and use of text
Analysis: insightful and accurate; shows understanding of connecting parts
Arrangement: organized; ideas flow logically and easily
Details: Abundant relevant examples
Sentence style: clear, with some effectiveness variety, emphasis and engagement
Introduction: introduces article; indicates purpose
Conclusion: Sums up paper’s analysis in fresh wording; notes value of paper; leaves reader with insights on topic
Format appropriate for r/s


Name 
Professor
Course
Date 
Analysis of an Argument Read: Agonism in the Academy: Surviving Higher Learning’s Argument Culture
Introduction
Deborah Tannen, a university professor at Georgetown University, puts forward the idea that the reviews of other people’s publications should be approached from a logical perspective and with the aim of healthy argument that recognises both the weak and strong aspects in the work. She says that the notion so prevalent that for someone’s review of another’s work to be valid they have to viciously tear it down is wrong in many aspects (Tannen 11). She constructs her article in an engaging way by first referring to a book review she and her reading group gave. She then goes on to put forward her points followed by quoting other people’s opinion supportive to hers. Her ending clearly states what she wanted the audience to get from the article. Her connection to the audience entails the use of engaging communication and real-life examples that strengthen her point of view. Hers is a great effort at getting others to agree with her and support her point of argument (Robin 18).
Agonism
		Tannen wraps her argument around the term ‘Agonism’ which refers to survivalist animal behaviour that includes aggression, defence and avoidance of given factors in the immediate environment. It is a term mostly favoured by biologists in referring to how animals respond to stimuli (Kunzman 6). Tannen harnesses this term and puts forth several examples as to why book reviewers’ behaviour can be likened to that of animals responding to stimuli. The perceptions so ingrained in the reviewers that to make valid arguments one has to give a negative review are the result of factors existent in the society, a few of which Tannen illustrates (Kunzman 7).
	Her first illustration of Agonism is her disappointment after her book-group meeting gave negative reviews on a book they had agreed to read without much consideration when she had a quite positive opinion. What most surprised her was that even the member who had admitted to not having read the book also gave a negative review (Tannen 15). She thus learns of the fact that most reviewers go into reading a book with perceptions already created. With her audience having gotten the direction of her argument, Tannen goes on building upon her argument in many persuasive ways.
	She also employs Agonism in portraying the academic scene as the breeding ground for agonistic perceptions. She points out that the way research and classes are carried out, the way ideas are exchanged in meetings and through print media with the ideological assumption that intellectual inquiry is a metaphorical battle are wrong for the academia (Robin 23). She further says that another assumption that is wrong is the one that to demonstrate academic prowess, one has to find fault and criticize other people’s work.
	Another incidence in which Tannen demonstrates the meaning of Agonism is in saying that there is in people’s academic lives a conventional framework that expects them to analyse others’ works with differing opinion (Tannen 12). She reinforces her argument on this point by saying the framework so stated somehow forces the reviewer to seek even the weakest negative point in a generally accepted piece of material. The aim, she says, is usually to justify personal opinions.
Battle Metaphor
	The battle metaphor is another point that Tannen uses to get the audience to see her point of view. She explains it by examples that point to its meaning being that the academic scene has the habit of training students not to participate in a piece of work but to find as much opinion to the contrary as possible (Robin 17). She says students are assigned to read scholarly work then invited to tear it down with the perception that only by expressing opinion that is contrary to that of the authors does one get better at academics. Tannen proves this wrong by pointing out that it creates arrogance and narrow-mindedness in the students, qualities not serving the fundamental purpose of education. Though harder work to do, students should also be trained to take side with the author and absorb outside ideas to open up their minds and improve their comprehension of the material at hand (Tannen 11).
	The battle metaphor proves yet again important in Tannen’s connecting to her audience from the example of academic debates where heated arguments are assumed to benefit the students when the truth is far from that. She says that given that in debates students choose sides, a point raised by one side, however much it makes sense to the opposite side, is disputed since agreeing with it means conceding defeat and showing weakness. She also points out that rarely do debates involve all those present (Kunzman 10). While few are actively engaged in arguing, a handful is attentive while the rest don’t bother with the whole situation. Her argument convinces the audience since everyone who has ever participated in a debate knows that only a small part of those present is actively involved.
	She therefore proposes discussions that are healthy in many aspects. Besides breaking down the barrier that pitches participants against each other, Tannen explains clearly that it leads the students to open-minded inquiry and respect for other people’s work. She goes on to site an example where a couple of professors, Karen Tracy and Sheryl Baratz, examined a weekly colloquia aimed at exchanging ideas. The professors ended up judging the competences of the participants and further reinforced the battle metaphor by expecting tough questions between the participants as opposed to any agreements in opinion (Tannen 56). She also points out that the best grades in school and the best jobs in society go to those who differed in opinion with other people’s works as opposed to those who healthily agreed.
	This battle metaphor she uses creates an atmosphere of animosity by pitching people at against others’ works even before they handle them. She goes further to say this atmosphere poisons people’s relations to one another while corrupting the integrity of their research (Robin 40).
Conclusion 
	To wrap up this analysis, it is evident that Tannen employed several methods to get the audience to agree with her point of view. She manages that by the use of examples that further support her argument. The audience thus participates in her argument and ends up sharing her point of view. She narrates her examples so well that is becomes very easy for the audience to see eye to eye with her. She tries to undo the ethos prevalent with her argument and succeeds in her endeavour (Kunzman 11). Her argument captures the pathos in academicians having preconceptions about others’ works and missing a lot of knowledge intended for them by the authors. She thus concludes that Agonism and the battle metaphor discourage many brilliant ideas from reaching many audiences where they could be of great benefit (Robin 20). While some authors simply can’t stand the mud thrown on their work, many waste a lot of creative energy defending their works from critics’ opinion.













Work Cited
Kunzman, Robert. Grappling with the Good: Talking About Religion And Morality in Public Schools. New York: SUNY Press, 2006.
Robin, Ron. Scandals and Scoundrels: Seven Cases That Shook the Academy. California: University of California Press, 2004. 
Tannen, Deborah. Agonism in the Academy: Surviving Higher Learning’s Argument Culture. The Chronicle of Higher Education (March 31), 2000. 

